---
layout: post
title: Digital Corpora
subtitle: of Latin Texts
image: /images/corpora2.jpg
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
For some time now I have been looking for digital text corpora and wordlists of Latin. I would like to construct wordlists that can be used with the *EML-spellchecker* (in development now); I am specially interested in data which are chronologically tagged, since later iterations of the software should be able to produce information about the chronological stratification of an EML-text's vocabulary. 
<!--more-->

## Digital Corpora of Latin Texts

I have not had much luck with chronologically tagged data; but I have an idea of how to proceed with the help of the [Index librorum](www.thesaurus.badw.de/hilfsmittel-fuer-benutzer/index.html) of the *Thesaurus Linguae Latinae* which contains complete data for the Latin literature before 600 AD and is conveniently open access on line, and the list of works in the [NLW](www.neulatein.de). The following are the corpora which are significant for me.

#### LatinISE
[lindat.mff.cuni.cz/repository/xmlui/handle/11234/1-2506](lindat.mff.cuni.cz/repository/xmlui/handle/11234/1-2506)<br />
License: CC BY-SA 4.0 <br />
9873823 words, 340233 different forms<br />
A lemmatized corpus built in 2012 by Barbara McGillivray collected from the *LacusCurtius*, *IntraText* and *Musisque Deoque* websites. The lemmatization reflects the state of the art of 2012, but will be usable for the more frequent forms.

#### Perseus
[www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper](www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/opensource/downloads/texts/hopper-texts-GreekRoman.tar.gz)<br />
License: Creative Commons ShareAlike 3.0 License<br />
The source of many other text corpora on the Web. I have not managed to find any lemmatization data from the Perseus Lemmatizer on the Perseus site. Probably they are created dynamically.

#### IntraText
[www.intratext.com](www.intratext.com/)<br />
License: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported<br />
Texts up to the twentieth century. Rough chronological tagging. No lemmatization data.

#### Corpus Corporum
[www.mlat.uzh.ch](www.mlat.uzh.ch)<br />
License: Rights vary due to heterogeneous origin<br />
A rich ressource for the Latin corpus linguist; many texts have lemmatization data.

All the corpora mentioned above contain data from medieval and later texts.

#### digital Monumenta Germaniae Historica
[www.dmgh.de](www.dmgh.de/)<br />
License: Open Access<br />
For medieval Latin this is *the* site. The site's technology is from 2010, and clearly the primary public are not corpus linguists, but medieval scholars who need access to the MGH-volumes. Consequently, no lemmatization data. Still, one can access an OCR of all the pages with a high quality text; thus the dMGH could contribute to the construction of a corpus of medieval texts, though it would need some effort. Lemmatization would probably be a lot of work.

#### Index Thomisticus Treebank
[itreebank.marginalia.it](itreebank.marginalia.it/view/projet.php)<br />
License: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported<br />
Latin texts of Thomas Aquinas (*Summa contra Gentiles partially, Scriptum super Sententiis Magistri Petri Lombardi, Summa Theologiae*) with morphological, syntactic and semantic/pragmatic annotation. I assume that the package contains lemmatization data. 
The *Corpus Thomisticum* itself comes with an "All rights reserved" license, though I can not fathom what the point might be of putting a text corpus on the Web without accompanying rights.

#### LatInfLex
[github.com/matteo-pellegrini/LatInfLexi](github.com/matteo-pellegrini/LatInfLexi)<br />
No license indicated<br />
This is an inflected lexicon of Latin verbs in a csv-file. It includes 254 inflected forms of 3,348 verbs from Delatte et al., *Dictionnaire fréquentiel et Index inverse de la langue latine* (1981), irrespective of whether they are actually attested. 

#### Thesaurus Formarum Totius Latinitatis
License: commercial<br />
By Paul Tombeur. Chronologically tagged. No lemmatization data. This is a commercial product; its data can neither be freely used nor distributed. I mention it because it is an interesting product.
